add subdaily granularity (#5882)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/dimensions.md

tags: [Metrics, Semantic Layer]
---

> Dimensions represent the non-aggregatable columns in your data set that are the attributes, features, or characteristics that describe or categorize data. In the context of the dbt Semantic Layer, dimensions are part of a larger structure called a semantic model. They are created along with other elements like [entities](/docs/build/entities) and [measures](/docs/build/measures) and used to add more details to your data. In SQL, dimensions are typically included in the `group by` clause of your SQL query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dimensions represent the non-aggregatable columns in your data set, which are the attributes, features, or characteristics that describe or categorize data. In the context of the dbt Semantic Layer, dimensions are part of a larger structure called a semantic model. They are created along with other elements like [entities](/docs/build/entities) and [measures](/docs/build/measures) and used to add more details to your data. In SQL, dimensions are typically included in the `group by` clause of your SQL query.
```

<!--dimensions are non-aggregatable expressions that define the level of aggregation for a metric used to define how data is sliced or grouped in a metric. Since groups can't be aggregated, they're considered to be a property of the primary or unique entity of the table.

Groups are defined within semantic models, alongside entities and measures, and correspond to non-aggregatable columns in your dbt model that provides categorical or time-based context. In SQL, dimensions  is typically included in the GROUP BY clause.-->

> All dimensions require a `name`, `type` and in some cases, can optionally include an `expr` parameter. The `name` for your Dimension must be unique wihtin the same semantic model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All dimensions require a `name` and `type` and, in some cases, can optionally include an `expr` parameter. The `name` for your Dimension must be unique within the same semantic model.
```

> All dimensions require a `name` and `type` and, in some cases, can optionally include an `expr` parameter. The `name` for your Dimension must be unique within the same semantic model.

Reviewer 2: It seems redundant to say both "in some cases" and "optionally" - maybe pick one or the other?

Reviewer 3: Yup good call. I will update.

| Parameter | Description | Type |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- |
| `name` |  Refers to the name of the group that will be visible to the user in downstream tools. It can also serve as an alias if the column name or SQL query reference is different and provided in the `expr` parameter. <br /><br /> Dimension names should be unique within a semantic model, but they can be non-unique across different models as MetricFlow uses [joins](/docs/build/join-logic) to identify the right dimension. | Required |

> | `type` | Specifies the type of group created in the semantic model. There are two types:<br /><br />- **Categorical**: Describe attributes or features like geography or sales geo. <br />- **Time**: Time-based dimensions like timestamps or dates. | Required |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `type` | Specifies the type of group created in the semantic model. There are two types:<br /><br />- **Categorical**: Describe attributes or features like geography or sales region. <br />- **Time**: Time-based dimensions like timestamps or dates. | Required |
```

  dimensions:
    - name: order_date
      type: time
      type_params:
        time_granularity: day
      label: "Date of transaction" # Recommend adding a label to provide more context to users consuming the data
      expr: ts
    - name: is_bulk_transaction
      type: categorical
      expr: case when quantity > 10 then true else false end
```

> Dimensions are bound to the primary entity of the semantic model they are defined in. For example if a Dimension called `is_bulk_transaction` is defined in a model that has `transaction` as a primary entity, then `is_bulk_transaction` is scoped to the `transaction` entity. To reference this dimension you would use the fully qualified dimension name `transaction__is_bulk_transaction`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dimensions are bound to the primary entity of the semantic model in which they are defined. For example, if a dimension called `is_bulk_transaction` is defined in a model with `transaction` as a primary entity, then `is_bulk_transaction` is scoped to the `transaction` entity. To reference this dimension you would use the fully qualified dimension name `transaction__is_bulk_transaction`. 
```

> Dimensions are bound to the primary entity of the semantic model in which they are defined. For example, if a dimension called `is_bulk_transaction` is defined in a model with `transaction` as a primary entity, then `is_bulk_transaction` is scoped to the `transaction` entity. To reference this dimension you would use the fully qualified dimension name `transaction__is_bulk_transaction`. 

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to use an example dimension name that makes it somewhat clear why we bind it to the entity name. E.g., something like `transaction__country` or just changing the name to something like `transaction__is_bulk` would make this feel less redundant.

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

> MetricFlow requires that all semantic models have a primary entity. This is to guarantee unique dimension names. If your data source doesn't have a primary entity, you need to assign the entity a name using the `primary_entity` key. It doesn't necessarily have to map to a column in that table and assigning the name doesn't affect query generation. An example of defining a primary entity for a data source that doesn't have a primary entity column is below:

Reviewer 2: Can we add that for a virtual primary entity like this, you should try to make the name unique? I don't think we enforce that (we should) but it's definitely helpful

Reviewer 3: 👍

## Categorical

> Categorical Dimensions are used to group metrics by different attributes, features, or characteristics such as product type. They can refer to existing columns in your dbt model or be calculated using a SQL expression with the `expr` parameter. An example of a categorical dimension is `is_bulk_transaction`, which is a group created by applying a case statement to the underlying column `quantity`. This allows users to group or filter the data based on bulk transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Categorical dimensions are used to group metrics by different attributes, features, or characteristics such as product type. They can refer to existing columns in your dbt model or be calculated using a SQL expression with the `expr` parameter. An example of a categorical dimension is `is_bulk_transaction`, which is a group created by applying a case statement to the underlying column `quantity`. This allows users to group or filter the data based on bulk transactions.
```

mf query --metrics users_created,users_deleted --group-by metric_time__year --order-by metric_time__year
```

> You can set `is_partition` for time to define specific time spans. Additionally, use the `type_params` section to set `time_granularity` to adjust aggregation detail (hourly, daily, weekly, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set `is_partition` for time to define specific time spans. Additionally, use the `type_params` section to set `time_granularity` to adjust aggregation details (hourly, daily, weekly, and so on).
```

<TabItem value="time_gran" label="time_granularity">

> `time_granularity` specifies the grain of a time dimension. MetricFlow will transform the underlying column to the specified granularity. For example, if you add hourly granularity to a time dimension column, MetricFlow will run a `date_trunc` function to convert the timestamp to hourly. You can easily change the time grain at query time and aggregate to a coarser grain, for example from hourly to monthly. However, you can't go from a coarser grain to a finer grain, for example from monthly to hourly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`time_granularity` specifies the grain of a time dimension. MetricFlow will transform the underlying column to the specified granularity. For example, if you add hourly granularity to a time dimension column, MetricFlow will run a `date_trunc` function to convert the timestamp to hourly. You can easily change the time grain at query time and aggregate it to a coarser grain, for example, from hourly to monthly. However, you can't go from a coarser grain to a finer grain (monthly to hourly).
```

> Any granularity supported by your engine's `date_trunc` function will work, with the most common granularities being hour, day, week, month, quarter, and year.

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite accurate (e.g., [look at the options available for snowflake](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/functions-date-time#label-supported-date-time-parts)). Might be better to just list the options we support.
For sub-daily options, we support these for all engines unless otherwise noted):
- nanosecond (snowflake only)
- microsecond (all engines except trino)
- millisecond
- second
- minute
- hour

Reviewer 3: Updated

> Any granularity supported by your engine's `date_trunc` function is supported, with the most common granularities being hour, day, week, month, quarter, and year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any granularity supported by your engine's `date_trunc` function will work, with the most common granularities being hour, day, week, month, quarter, and year.
```

> Aggregation between metrics with different granularities is possible, with the Semantic Layer returning results at the coarser granularity by default. For example, when querying two metrics with daily and monthly granularity, the resulting aggregation will be at the monthly level.

Reviewer 2: I think `coarsest` would be grammatically correct here

<TabItem value="time_gran" label="time_granularity">

> `time_granularity` specifies the grain of a time dimension. MetricFlow will transform the underlying column to the specified granularity. For example, if you add hourly granularity to a time dimension column, MetricFlow will run a `date_trunc` function to convert the timestamp to hourly. You can easily change the time grain at query time and aggregate it to a coarser grain, for example, from hourly to monthly. However, you can't go from a coarser grain to a finer grain (monthly to hourly).

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 This section mentions hourly granularity, which isn't available for <=1.8. We should keep this section for 1.9+, but can we swap the word "hourly" with "daily" for <=1.8?

Our supported granularities are:

> * nanosecond (Snowflake only)

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 These sub-daily granularity options are showing up for all versions. Can we keep them all for 1.9+, but remove anything smaller than day for <=1.8?

* microsecond 
* millisecond
* second
* minute
* hour

Aggregation between metrics with different granularities is possible, with the Semantic Layer returning results at the coarsest granularity by default. For example, when querying two metrics with daily and monthly granularity, the resulting aggregation will be at the monthly level.

```yaml
dimensions: 
  - name: created_at
    type: time
    label: "Date of creation"
    expr: ts_created # ts_created is the underlying column name from the table 
    is_partition: True 
    type_params:

>       time_granularity: hour 

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 Can we swap in day instead of hour for <=1.8?

### SCD Type II

:::caution

> Currenlty Semanntic Models with SCD Type II dimension cannot contain measueres.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, semantic models with SCD Type II dimensions cannot contain measures.
```
